docs: Initial OTAP Spec Draft (#2040)
open-telemetry/otel-arrow: OTAP_FORMAL_SPEC.md

# OpenTelemetry Arrow Protocol (OTAP) Formal Specification

**Version:** 0.2
**Status:** Draft

## Table of Contents

1. [Introduction](#1-introduction)
2. [Data Model](#2-data-model)
3. [Transport and Service Definitions](#3-transport-and-service-definitions)
4. [IPC Stream Management and Schema Resets](#4-ipc-stream-management-and-schema-resets)
5. [Payload Specifications](#5-payload-specifications)
6. [Id Columns](#6-id-columns)
7. [Error Handling](#7-error-handling)

---

## 1. Introduction

### 1.1 Purpose

The OpenTelemetry Arrow Protocol (OTAP) defines a wire protocol for transmitting
OpenTelemetry telemetry signals (logs, metrics, and traces) from a Client to a 
Server. OTAP optimizes on multiple axis for compression efficiency, memory 

> usage, and processing speed while being semanticallyequivalent to OpenTelemetry

Reviewer: ```suggestion
usage, and processing speed while being semantically equivalent to OpenTelemetry
```

Dictionary encode eligible columns. Clients that do this MUST detect Dictionary
overflow during the Stream and initiate a Schema Reset to upgrade key sizes or
change to the native type.

### 4.4 IPC Stream Management and Schema Resets

Within a gRPC Stream for some Signal, there is a separate Arrow IPC Stream for 
each Payload Type transmitted by the Client.

Each IPC Stream is uniquely identified within a gRPC Stream by a combination of
an ArrowPayload's `type` and `schema_id` fields. The first time a Client sends
an ArrowPayload with a unique combination of these fields, it marks the start 
of an Arrow IPC Stream for that Payload Type.

This means that the messages contained in the `record` field MUST contain a 
Schema Message prior to any Dictionary, Delta Dictionary, or Record Batch 
Messages in the Stream.

Servers MUST keep track of Arrow IPC Stream state per gRPC Stream and per
Payload Type and `schema_id` within the Stream.

When a Client changes the `schema_id` sent for some Payload Type, this is known
as a Schema Reset. The Server, upon receiving such an `ArrowPayload`, MUST 
begin processing the Messages in the `record` field of that message as if they 

> begin a new IPC Stream.

Reviewer: Should we callout that the server only keeps track of one schema_id per payload time at a time?

e.g. a client couldn't send
```
{ type: Logs, schema_id: 1, record: ... }, // start of IPC stream
{ type: Logs, schema_id: 2, record: ... }, // start of new IPC stream
{ type: Logs, schema_id: 1, record: ... }, // continuation of stream from first message (no Schema in IPC payload)
```
The third message wouldn't work

OpenTelemetry defines the concept of an
["AnyValue"](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/common/#anyvalue). 
This is a value representing a union of one or more types: 
`string`, `int`, `double`, `bool`, `map`, `slice`, or `bytes`.

In OTAP this is implemented via multiple "value" columns either `str`, `int`, 
`double`, `bool`, `bytes`, or `ser`.  `type` field that serves as the 
discriminant and note that multiple AnyValue types can map to the `bytes` 
column. See the below table for the exact mappings.

// TODO: I see some mention of Arrow Sparse and Dense Unions in the Go code,
is that out of date or am I missing some details there?

This technique is used in all Payload Types that utilize Attribute16 and 
Attribute32 schemas as well as the LOGS `body` field.

The "Active Field" is defined as the field that contains valid data for the 
row, all other value fields MUST be ignored for that row.

The mappings between `type` discriminants and Active Fields is as follows:

| type value | AnyValue type | Active Field |
|------------|--------------|---------|
| 0 | empty | N/A |
| 1 | str | str |
| 2 | int | int |
| 3 | double | double |
| 4 | bool | bool |
| 5 | map | bytes |

> | 6 | slice | bytes |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| 5 | map | ser |
| 6 | slice | ser |

given Stream.
- A `schema_id` MAY be derived from the schema structure (field names, types, and their ordering).
- `type` MUST NOT be sent as `UNKNOWN` (value 0) // NEEDS_TRIAGE
- `record` MUST contain at least one valid Encapsulated Arrow IPC message // NEEDS_TRIAGE: We could just ignore it if it doesn't

### 3.3 Arrow IPC Layer

The Arrow IPC (Interprocess Communication) layer is the innermost layer containing the actual telemetry data 
in Apache Arrow's columnar format. Arrow IPC defines how schemas and data are serialized into byte streams using 
a standardized format that can be read by any Arrow-compatible library. This layer enables:

- **Dictionary/Delta Dictionary encoding**: Efficient representation of repeated string values
- **Zero-copy deserialization**: Data can be read directly from wire format without copying

Clients and servers communicating over a Stream are managing multiple independent Arrow IPC streams,
one for each Payload Type that the client has sent. On the server side, each `record` is routed to a separate 
IPC stream consumer based on its `type` and `schema_id`. This means that a single BAR may feed multiple 

> independent Arrow IPC stream readers simultaneously.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure this paragraph is clear enough. A BAR message is sent over a **gRPC stream** between the client and the server. This BAR contains a collection of ArrowPayloads (of different types).

So within a single gRPC stream, multiple BAR messages are exchanged, each containing multiple ArrowPayloads, and for each (payload type, schema id) tuple, there is an **Arrow IPC stream**.

5. [Id Columns](#5-id-columns)
6. [Schema Management](#6-schema-management)
7. [Error Handling](#7-error-handling)
8. [Compliance Requirements](#8-compliance-requirements)

---

## 1. Introduction

### 1.1 Purpose

The OpenTelemetry Arrow Protocol (OTAP) defines a wire protocol for transmitting OpenTelemetry telemetry signals (logs, metrics, and traces) using Apache Arrow's columnar format wrapped in gRPC streams. OTAP is a column oriented protocol that optimizes for compression efficiency, memory usage, and CPU performance while being semantically equivalent to OpenTelemetry Protocol (OTLP).

### 1.2 Requirements Language

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC 2119](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119).

See [Appendix F: Glossary](#appendix-f-glossary) for terminology and [Appendix G: References](#appendix-g-references) for reference material.

---

## 2. Data Model

### 2.1 Normalized Representation

OTAP represents telemetry Signals as a set of normalized tables connected by foreign key relationships; 

> effectively a database. Each Signal type has a different number and set of tables reflecting the data 

Reviewer: nit: should we drop this phrase "effectively a database"? I feel it may sew confusion for those who philosophically disagree about what technically constitutes a  "database"

> effectively a database.

transported by that Signal. 

Each table within a Signal has a designated Payload Type that identifies it. The foreign key
relationships between these tables form a Rooted Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) with the 
Root Payload Type being the root of that graph. 

For example, the Logs signal type consists of four Payload Types: LOGS, LOG_ATTRS, RESOURCE_ATTRS, 
and SCOPE_ATTRS. The LOGS table is the Root Payload Type for Logs and fills a similar role as an OTLP Log. 
Each Log has a unique `id` which identifies it, and links it to the LOG_ATTRS table which defines the log's
attributes. LOGS similarly contains `resource` and `scope` fields, each having an `id`  which links them 

> to the RESOURCE_ATTRS and SCOPE_ATTRS tables.

Author: Agreed, I've dropped the word "unique" and taken a note to find somewhere to talk about the scope of uniqueness of the ids. Let me know if you have a good idea on it, I'll update here based on where I slot it back in.

The Metrics and Traces signals have a similar structure, but with more tables and are defined 
below along with the relationships between each table.

#### 2.1.1 Logs Signal Tables

| Payload Type | Description | Parent Payload Type |
|---|---|---|
| LOGS | Core log record data (Root) | — |
| LOG_ATTRS | Log-level attributes | LOGS |
| RESOURCE_ATTRS | Resource attributes | LOGS |
| SCOPE_ATTRS | Scope attributes | LOGS |

#### 2.1.2 Metrics Signal Tables

| Payload Type | Description | Parent Payload Type |
|---|---|---|
| UNIVARIATE_METRICS | Core metric metadata (Root) | — |

> | MULTIVARIATE_METRICS | Core metric metadata (Root) | — |

Reviewer: I feel the description should not use the word "metadata". 

The reason I feel this way is because what we call METRIC_ATTRS in OTAP data model is actually called metadata in the OTLP data model:
https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-proto/blob/d3fb76d70deb0874692bd0ebe03148580d85f3bb/opentelemetry/proto/metrics/v1/metrics.proto#L212-L220

For these rows, maybe say something like "Definition of metric (Root)". FWIW, the OTLP data model describes the equivalent structure as "Defines a Metric which has one or more timeseries."
https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-proto/blob/d3fb76d70deb0874692bd0ebe03148580d85f3bb/opentelemetry/proto/metrics/v1/metrics.proto#L104

- **Columnar layout**: Data organized by column rather than by row, enabling better compression and SIMD processing

Clients and servers communicating over a Stream are managing multiple independent Arrow IPC streams,
one for each Payload Type that the client has sent. On the server side, each `record` is routed to a separate 
IPC stream consumer based on its `type` and `schema_id`. This means that a single BAR may feed multiple 
independent Arrow IPC stream readers simultaneously.

Note that Arrow IPC Streams are inherently stateful and must track the current schema and dictionary state for 
each stream.

#### 3.3.1 IPC Messages

Arrow IPC, including the Encapsulated Message types and ordering, is well defined in the Arrow IPC 
specification, but here is a brief description of the lifecycle.

Implementation specifics are discussed in later sections // NEEDS TRIAGE.

---

## 4. Payload Specifications

This section defines the complete Arrow schema for all OTAP payload types, organized by signal category.

**Table Column Descriptions:**
- **Name**: Field name in the Arrow schema
- **Type**: Base Arrow type for this field

> - **Alt Representations**: Alternative encodings allowed for this field (e.g., `Dict(u8)` for Dictionary(UInt8, Type), `List(T)` for list types). See also: [Dictionary Encoding](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/format/Columnar.html#dictionary-encoded-layout)

Author: >I wonder if there's a way to restructure how we define these type columns to make it clearer when each type is used. I'm worried the "Alt Representation" might be interpreted as types that are accepted albeit non-standard, or are chosen in some laissez-faire fashion when in reality there is some logic to which type is used.

Yeah "Alt Representation" is not great, I changed the type columns like 3 times already and still don't like it 😅.

The one thing I do like about the current version is that the Native Type is stated plainly in the `Type` field and not mixed in with other stuff. I think presenting the column as it's Native type and then letting the exact representation be an additional implementation detail maps well to how we think about OtapArrowRecords in code.

The first name I tried for "Alt Representations" was "Encodings" which soon could include REE, but I was afraid of overloading the word "Encoding" especially in the case of IDs. I also didn't want to have to state "Native" every time under the Representations/Encodings column so that's why I tried labeling as "Alt".

> For the case of dictionaries, the rules are basically like - OTAP will try to use the smallest dictionary key it can, and eventually overflow to the native (non dict-encoded) array.

I think discussion about which dictionary key types are selected and how is best left to an appendix or documentation about individual components/implementations i.e. "Producer implementations SHOULD prefer dictionary encodings where possible and SHOULD select the smallest possible key size for the type and only increase size when detecting overflow". 

I wasn't sure if "Producers" was actually a concept I should even include in the spec directly since there's technically nothing requiring a valid client have the same Producer abstraction that we have.

>Maybe instead of Alt Representation, we have a column like "Dict key min size"?

I'm not sure about "Dict key min size". I think if there were a lot of dictionary sizes it might make sense, but with only two possible I kind of like stating it plainly. If the column is not allowed to be dictionary encoded then leaving this as `-` could also be interpreted as "no minimum, therefore any dictionary size is allowed".  I'd also like to leave the column open for adding REE in the future which could be another valid "encoding".

Since Arrow does canonically [refer to Dictionary/REE as "Encodings"](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/format/Columnar.html#dictionary-encoded-layout), maybe we could call it "Arrow Encodings" to make it clear that these are these are in the realm of Arrow and then we could refer to our Delta Encodings as something else?

> - **Alt Representations**: Alternative encodings allowed for this field (e.g., `Dict(u8)` for Dictionary(UInt8, Type), `List(T)` for list types). See also: [Dictionary Encoding](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/format/Columnar.html#dictionary-encoded-layout)

Reviewer: I see we've changed to optimized encoding, and I think this is a good heading. 

It's accurate, both in the sense that it's space optimized for transport and some of our processing is actually more optimized this these dict encoded columns as well (think of attribute renaming).

It's nice phrasing because calling it "optimized" instead of "alternate" will gently encourage use of the dictionary encoding

- **Nullable**: Whether the field can contain null values

> - **Required**: Whether this field must be present in every record

Author: Some good points to discuss! Non-required optional columns being excluded if their values are entirely null is outlined in 4.2:

```md
If the column is marked as optional in the OTAP spec, it SHOULD be omitted entirely by the Client if there 
is no data for that Column.
```

Regarding interpreting a missing column as null or a default value, this seems like a confusing point. Like you mention, different columns like `id` would want different interpretations when the column in missing. I'm not actually sure which columns could regularly take advantage of an "all default" value. Maybe this is a situation where we should be recommending REE instead which would be more explicit? I know it's not in the spec yet as allowed, but maybe we can explore that more.

In 5.5.1 I did try to define rules for AnyValues specifically:

```md
A `type` of `0` indicates that the value for the attribute is empty.

In the case of the LOGS payload, note that the AnyValue is contained in the 
`body` column which is also nullable. In this case a null entry is semantically
equivalent to a `type` of `0`.

If the column for the Active Field is not present, or the `type` falls outside 
of the allowed range, then the value for the key is also interpreted as empty.
```

The [OTel specification](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/otel/common/#anyvalue) uses this term "empty" instead of null.

> - **Required**: Whether this field must be present in every record

Reviewer: > If the column for the Active Field is not present, or the `type` falls outside 
of the allowed range, then the value for the key is also interpreted as empty.

Interesting - I have been interpreting these as invalid batches. 

For example, [here](https://github.com/open-telemetry/otel-arrow/blob/67bf2696f227001736b8c58b2aed4a6de0b648ef/rust/otap-dataflow/crates/pdata/src/otap/transform/transport_optimize/attributes.rs#L251-L252) and [here](https://github.com/open-telemetry/otel-arrow/blob/4aa67d74db11d16a333c588e0e51cda8854b5a10/rust/otap-dataflow/crates/query-engine/src/pipeline/expr.rs#L605-L607) we return errors while processing the batch if the attibrute type is outside the range 0-7.

I think we should probably handle these cases as invalid batches, rather than being permissive and treating the type as empty. I feel that in these cases, the type isn't actually indicating empty, it's indicating something ambiguous

| observed_time_unix_nano | Timestamp(Nanosecond) | — | No | Yes | — | — | Observation timestamp in Unix nanoseconds |
| trace_id | FixedSizeBinary(16) | — | Yes | No | — | — | Trace `id` for correlation |
| span_id | FixedSizeBinary(8) | — | Yes | No | — | — | Span `id` for correlation |
| severity_number | Int32 | — | Yes | No | — | — | Numeric severity level |
| severity_text | Utf8 | — | Yes | No | — | — | Textual severity level |
| body_type | UInt8 | — | No | Yes | — | — | Body value type (same encoding as attribute type) |
| body_str | Utf8 | — | No | Yes | — | — | String body (may be empty) |
| body_int | Int64 | — | Yes | No | — | — | Integer body (when body_type=3) |
| body_double | Float64 | — | Yes | No | — | — | Double body (when body_type=4) |
| body_bool | Boolean | — | Yes | No | — | — | Boolean body (when body_type=2) |
| body_bytes | Binary | — | Yes | No | — | — | Bytes body (when body_type=5) |
| body_ser | Binary | — | Yes | No | — | — | CBOR-encoded complex body (when body_type=6 or 7) |
| dropped_attributes_count | UInt32 | — | Yes | No | — | — | Number of dropped log attributes |
| flags | UInt32 | — | Yes | No | — | — | Trace flags |

> #### LOG_ATTRS

Author: Yeah I originally tried to structure by signal type and then group within signals, but I think that ended up being a silly idea. I'll reorganize this.

> #### LOG_ATTRS

Author: Reorganized and consolidate these.  I did end up organizing by signal, but only for "entities". Then At the end I have a section for attributes and split into u16 and u32.

| int_value | Int64 | — | No | Yes | — | — | Integer value |
| double_value | Float64 | — | No | Yes | — | — | Double value |
| flags | UInt32 | — | Yes | No | — | — | Data point flags |

#### SUMMARY_DATA_POINTS

| Name | Type | Alt Representations | Nullable | Required | Id Encoding | Metadata | Description |
|------|------|---------------------|----------|----------|-------------|----------|-------------|
| id | UInt32 | — | Yes | Yes | [DELTA](#652-delta-encoding) | encoding | Data point identifier (primary key) |
| parent_id | UInt16 | — | No | Yes | [DELTA](#652-delta-encoding) | encoding | Foreign key to [UNIVARIATE_METRICS / MULTIVARIATE_METRICS](#univariate_metrics--multivariate_metrics).id |
| start_time_unix_nano | Timestamp(Nanosecond) | — | Yes | No | — | — | Start time in Unix nanoseconds |
| time_unix_nano | Timestamp(Nanosecond) | — | Yes | No | — | — | Timestamp in Unix nanoseconds |
| count | UInt64 | — | Yes | No | — | — | Count of observations |
| sum | Float64 | — | Yes | No | — | — | Sum of observations |
| quantile | Float64 | List(Float64) | Yes | No | — | — | Quantile values |

> | value | Float64 | List(Float64) | Yes | No | — | — | Quantile observation values |

Author: Fixed the quantiles

| type value | Active field |
|------------|--------------|
| 1 | str |
| 2 | bool |
| 3 | int |
| 4 | double |
| 5 | bytes |
| 6 | ser (Array encoded as CBOR) |
| 7 | ser (Map encoded as CBOR) |

#### Body Fields (Logs)

For logs, the `body_type` field determines which `body_*` field is populated, similar to attribute fields.

#### Exemplar Value Fields

For exemplar tables, either `int_value` or `double_value` MUST be non-null (or both may be present with appropriate semantics).

### 4.7 Field Metadata

Fields MAY include metadata key-value pairs:

**Standard metadata keys**:

| Key | Values | Meaning |
|-----|--------|---------|
| `encoding` | `"plain"`, `"delta"`, `"quasidelta"` | Transport encoding applied |

**Custom metadata**:
- Implementations MAY define custom metadata keys
- Unknown metadata keys SHOULD be ignored by consumers

---

## 5. Id Columns

This section defines more details related to identifier columns used to establish relationships 
between payload types in the OTAP data model.

### 5.1 Primary Keys and Foreign Keys

All parent-child relationships in the OTAP data model follow a uniform convention:

> - **Parent tables** define an `id` column as their primary key

Reviewer: This might also be a good place to say a few additional things about the ID column:

1. It is nullable - null meaning the row had no children (e.g. a Log w/ no attributes)
2. It is unique within a batch, but is not globally unique (the same ID will be reused across subsequent batches)

Author: >This might also be a good place to say a few additional things about the ID column:
>1. It is nullable - null meaning the row had no children (e.g. a Log w/ no attributes)
>2. It is unique within a batch, but is not globally unique (the same ID will be reused across subsequent batches)

Added!

>Also, wrt to uniqueness, I guess resource.id and span.id are special cases because they are not unique for each row.

Yes, I do have a section in there on the special case of resource and span ids! Currently section 5.3.

Author: Random thought on cooperative optimization opportunities between batching and producers. In the reindexing code, I should check if the offset I compute is `0` and skip reassigning Ids.

 If producers don't start at 0 for Ids and instead try to continue until they overflow, it _might_ make that optimization get hit more often especially because I plan to sort the RecordBatches we're trying to reindex by their min/max Id in order to avoid reassignment at all when possible.
